005: Wire Encoding Abstraction (#16)
hyperledger-labs/perun-proposals: design/005-Wire-Encoding-Abstraction.md

# Proposal: Abstraction of Wire Messages Encoding

* Author(s): Sebastian Stammler (@sebastianst)

> * Status: propose

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Status: accept
```

* Related issue: <!-- org-name/project#NNN, org-name/project#NNN. -->
* Affected repository: go-perun

## Summary

The goal is to be able to choose different de/-serialization methods for wire
messages when using go-perun's `wire` package for inter-node wire message

> exchange.

Reviewer 2: `After the change, it should be possible to integrate protobuf serialization.`

## Motivation

Wire messages in go-perun currently use a home-baked and non-exchangeable
encoding and decoding format. When developing new Perun channel client
implementations, it would currently be necessary to mirror this custom
serialization format.

## Details

Wire messages in go-perun currently use a home-baked and non-exchangeable
encoding and decoding format, as specified by `Encode` and `Decode`
methods on wire messages (see, e.g., message definitions in `client/*msgs.go`),
methods `Envelope.(En|De)code` and functions `(En|De)code` in `wire/msg.go`.

> It should be possible to choose the wire serialization format, e.g., protobuf.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It should be possible to choose a different wire serialization protocol, e.g., protobuf.
```

### Note on `pkg/io` serialization

Note, thought, that this custom format is _not_ Go-specific. It is a packed,
little-endian binary encoding format and the serialization logic of actual Go
types is defined in package `pkg/io` and in particular in file
`pkg/io/serialize.go`. (However, I just realize that `*big.Int`s are actually
encoded in big-endian byte order...so we might as well switch to big-endianess
in `pkg/io/serialize.go` to be more consistent
([related issue](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/go-perun/issues/167)).)

## Rationale

See #motivation.

## Impact

This can be implemented in a backwards-compatible fashion, where `pkg/io`
encoding would be the default and other serialization backends could be injected
at runtime.

## Implementation

Luckily, this can be achieved with a few changes to package `wire` and the
`wire.Msg` implementations itself.

The core idea is to create an envelope serialization backend, which can be set

> at runtime (using `init()` of the respecive serialization backend

Reviewer 2: We might want to not fix it globally, but set it at runtime, e.g., when initializing the message bus.

Author: We usually "activate" backends by passively importing them (see channel and wallet backend). Then the best place to put global initialization is in `init()` functions. Another reason why you should always follow this patter (use `init` if setting global stuff) is that the program will crash, that is, panic at startup, not during runtime. So I propose to leave it as a global `init` backend in the scope of this proposal.

Reviewer: I think, in the first implementation of this abstraction, we could do it in the same way as in other backends (wallet, channel): having a global instance and activating them by passively importing.

As we [were discussing](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/perun-proposals/pull/16#issuecomment-908211989), in the future, when we want to make the serializer instance local to a channel, we could set the backend in runtime (when initializing the channel).

What do you think ? @sebastianst @matthiasgeihs

Author: Yes, global passive per `init`, modular per channel/client/foo injected at runtime.

Author: added `e.g.` nonetheless ;)

implementation). This backend's functions will then be used by
`Envelope.(En|De)code` of package `wire`. The `pkg/io` serialization would then
just be the default backend. Furthermore, the `Encode` methods of all `Msg`
implementations would also be moved to this backend.

Some of the proposed steps:
* Create _Wire Serialization Backend_
```go
package wire

// Backend is a serialization backend for wire messages. It should be set by a

> // backend's init() function.

Reviewer 2: Update naming `Backend` -> `EnvelopeSerializer`

type EnvelopeSerializer interface {

> 	func Encode(env *Envelope, w io.Writer) error
> 	func Decode(r io.Reader) (*Envelope, error)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	Encode(env *Envelope, w io.Writer) error
	Decode(r io.Reader) (*Envelope, error)
```

Author: I also realize that `env` should come after `w`, because it is more Go-idiomatic to put the target/source data stream first.

// Panics if called twice.
func SetEnvelopeSerializer(EnvelopeSerializer)
```
* `Envelope.(En|De)code` just call the functions of this backend, or we remove
  those functions and use the free functions `(En|De)codeEnvelope`.

* Current implementations of `Envelope.(En|De)code`, which are `pkg/io`
  specific, will be moved to a new backend implementation package
  `wire/perun`.
  * Together with this move many other functions currently in package `wire`,
    like `(En|De)code`, `DecodeAddress` and possibly many others that are
    specific to `pkg/io` serialization.

* We remove `perun.Encoder` from the `Msg interface`, Since en/decoding is now
  injected via the backend.

* We also move all implementations of methods `(En|De)code` on all `wire.Msg`
  implementations, which currently are contained in package `client`, into
  the new `wire/perun` package.
  * This would also make the scope of the `client` package cleaner.
  * I'd propose to register the encoders in a mapping similar to the `decoders`
    in file `wire/msg.go`.

Note that it is sufficient to create an abstraction of the envelope
serialization, because, e.g., the `wire/net` package does serialization via the

> `Envelope`, see file `wire/net/ioconn.go`.

Reviewer 2: Some more information could be added, where and how the encoding is used, i.e., where and how this would be injected and integrated within the current codebase. During our call, it was mentioned that the main entry point would be in `wire/net/ioconn.go`. How would this look like afterwrds? Any other usages?

Author: Besides network communication serialization, the only other place where this is used is persistence. There it would be nice to be able to choose the serialization protocol too, independent of the network serialization protocol. I'll add something about this.

Author: Added a section about persistence.

# Proposal: Abstraction of Wire Messages Encoding

> * Author(s): Sebastian Stammler (@sebastianst)

Reviewer: * Status: accept
 
 Can you add this line. It helps us keep track of whether a proposal was accepted or rejected.

> * Affected repository: go-perun

Reviewer: * Related issue: [go-perun#167](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/go-perun/issues/167) 

Can you add this line as well. It helps us trace back to the implementation issues at later point in time.
Currently, I think [go-perun#167](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/go-perun/issues/167) would be the only related issue. Other ones can be added later.

## Summary

The goal is to be able to choose different de/-serialization methods for wire
messages when using go-perun's `wire` package for inter-node wire message
exchange. After the changes, it should be possible to choose protobuf
serialization.

## Motivation

Wire messages in go-perun currently use a home-baked and non-exchangeable
encoding and decoding format. When developing new Perun channel client
implementations, it would currently be necessary to mirror this custom
serialization format.

## Details

Wire messages in go-perun currently use a home-baked and non-exchangeable
encoding and decoding format, as specified by `Encode` and `Decode`
methods on wire messages (see, e.g., message definitions in `client/*msgs.go`),
methods `Envelope.(En|De)code` and functions `(En|De)code` in `wire/msg.go`.

It should be possible to choose a different wire serialization protocol, e.g., protobuf.

### Note on `pkg/io` serialization

> Note, thought, that this custom format is _not_ Go-specific. It is a packed,

Reviewer: Note. that this.... 

Should we remove `, thought` ?

little-endian binary encoding format and the serialization logic of actual Go
types is defined in package `pkg/io` and in particular in file
`pkg/io/serialize.go`. (However, I just realize that `*big.Int`s are actually
encoded in big-endian byte order...so we might as well switch to big-endianess
in `pkg/io/serialize.go` to be more consistent
([related issue](https://github.com/hyperledger-labs/go-perun/issues/167)).)

## Rationale

See #motivation.

## Impact

This can be implemented in a backwards-compatible fashion, where `pkg/io`
encoding would be the default and other serialization backends could be injected

> at runtime.

Reviewer: The objective of this section to describe the impact level in one word. Could you assign one of the four impact levels ? 
I think it could be `New Feature`, because the `pkg/io` will be set as default backend and the usage of go-perun wold remain the same. If required, the `SetEnvelopeSerializer` function can be used to assign a different serialization backend.
```
Minor (Does not impact any existing features)
Major (Breaks one or more existing features)
New Feature (Introduces a functionality)
Architecture (Requires a modification of the architecture) 
```

You could then move this text to impact to Rationale section.

`The suggested implementation is backwards-compatible, where `pkg/io` will be the default and other.... `

## Implementation

Luckily, this can be achieved with a few changes to package `wire` and the
`wire.Msg` implementations itself.

The core idea is to create an envelope serialization backend, which can be set
at runtime (e.g., using `init()` of the respecive serialization backend
implementation). This backend's functions will then be used by
`Envelope.(En|De)code` of package `wire`. The `pkg/io` serialization would then
just be the default backend. Furthermore, the `Encode` methods of all `Msg`
implementations would also be moved to this backend.

Some of the proposed steps:
* Create _Wire Serialization Backend_
```go
package wire

// EnvelopeSerializer is a serialization backend for wire messages. It should be

> // set by the implementation packet's init() function.

Reviewer: Should it not be `implementation package's init() fucntion` ? It currently says `packet's init() funtion`.
